A very good morning to all of you.
We'll just start in 2 minutes, maybe more people can join, and then we'll start.
A very good morning to all of you, and welcome to today's session. So, today we'll be continuing with what we had started in the last turn.
That is data preprocessing. So, I will just take you through a quick recap of what we did yesterday, and then we'll start today's portion.
So just allow me to share my slides.
Okay, so I hope my screen is visible, and I'm audible to all of you.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
00:15:59
Yes.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:16:01
Thanks. So yesterday, we just did a quick recap, we… sorry, we'll just do a quick recap of what we did yesterday. So, we started out with the foundations of how AI evolved.
So, we started out understanding what is cognitive science, and that it's an interdisciplinary area, including many, fields, like, neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, computer science, and AI in it.
And it deals with the study of mind and its processes.
When we talk about AI, we actually talk about,
Emulating human-like intelligence, and this is done by computer systems.
And, therefore, evolved the concept of AI, where
Computer systems, exhibit human-like behavior with the help of something called neurons. So these neurons are actually similar to the… they're somewhat similar to the actual biological neurons that are present in human brain.
Then AI itself is interdisciplinary and draws upon, fields like computer science, statistics, mathematics, sociology, and so on and so forth.
And, then we did the relationship between AI, which is a superset.
which has the subset machine learning, which has the subset deep learning, followed by generative AI and agentic AI.
and NLP.
So there are different kinds of tasks that, can be performed as part of AI.
And we… our main focus would be on the task of learning.
So, machines learn, patterns from previously available data, which is also called historical data.
And, with the help of this data, historical data, machines are able to learn to generate new facts
From old ones, or to generate completely new concepts, or to distinguish one situation from the other, or distinguish one environment from some new environment.
And, and all the tasks that,
Help machines to become intelligent form part of machine learning.
Then there are a variety of subsets when we talk about major AI techniques.
Which involves supervised learning, unsupervised learning, regression, etc.
we discussed what is supervised learning and why it is called supervised learning. So the term supervised learning is coined because in this case, we have the model being built from a data called the training data. It is a special data.
Which not just has the attribute values, it also has the class label given to us. And in this process, we try to build a map, a function.
From, so we try to find out a function.
Which maps the input, that is the attribute set, to the output, which is a class label.
So, we'll be doing, in details about different classification algorithms as we go along.
Then we talked about different,
real-world applications. There are immense applications of classification.
Such as segmentation, frog detection, etc.
Then, I introduced to you the concept of discriminative models, and classification, is a discriminative model.
Which helps us to distinguish between the different categories that are available.
in the data.
And discriminative models usually help to classify and then use this classification model to predict the class labels from the input data.
And, the idea is to find out a function, that helps to make a boundary that separates the different classes that are there in the given data.
And the output here would be the class label.
Now, talking about unsupervised learning, the term unsupervised learning is coined because, here in this case, we do not have any class labels given to us, we just have that data, and we try to group the data or find out the natural groupings that is available in the data.
With the help of, similarity measures.
So, similarity measures are those metrics or measures that help us to assess or quantify the similarity between data points.
And based on that similarity, the points are clustered together, or grouped together, in such a way that points which are
Very close together, output in the same cluster, thereby minimizing the intra-cluster distances and maximizing the inter-cluster distances.
So, then we talked about, clustering applications.
Then we discussed regression and forecasting.
So, I had introduced to you what is predictive analytics, and how classification plays a role in predictive analytics. When we talk about predicting value, then it's called forecasting, and regression can be used for forecasting.
We also talked about anomaly detection, where we try to identify abnormal behavior from the given data. It's also called outlier identification, and different types of supervised and unsupervised learning methods can help to perform anomaly detection.
Then, I introduced to you deep learning techniques, where neural networks are used, which are inspired by the human brain and human neurons.
Which are there in human brain.
And whenever the data that we are having is very complex, and the patterns are also very complicated.
Then deep learning methods are used.
Such as on data like text, images, audio, etc. And there are many deep learning techniques, like convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural networks, long-short-term memory, LSTM.
And so on and so forth, which we'll be covering in the subsequent sections.
Then, deep learning has immense applications in various domains, like computer vision, NLP, speech recognition, healthcare, finance, and…
So, so forth… And finally, we talked about, generative AI, where,
There are… we talk about AI models that are able not just to analyze the data, but to create new content. That new content could be text, audio, video, images, code.
Or, any other, data types.
And they are capable of understanding the context, the style of writing, the structure that should be available, in a way that is similar to human-like content generation.
And, generative AI models work on huge quantities of data, or purpose, and they use this to learn the patterns, and then after learning, they generate new patterns, which may be similar to the patterns they learn, or they may be of different types.
Then, so, unlike the discriminative models.
Generative AI talks about generative models. So, the purpose of discriminative model is just to classify and predict class labels. However, the purpose of generative AI is to generate new samples.
And,
There are different, types of algorithms that fall in each of these categories. For example, discriminative model could be logistic regression.
SVM or other classifiers, whereas generative model.
Could be GPT, BERT, GANs, and so on and so forth.
And then,
the generative AI models progress to agentic AI, where there are agents, one or multiple agents, usually there are multiple agents.
That, work in collaboration with each other, and…
They are autonomous in nature, and they are capable of learning an objective or goal.
Then, working towards completion of the goal.
Planning, coordinating, dynamically changing, taking feedback.
improving, and so on and so forth. They have huge capabilities. And they act like assistants, collaborative assistants, which help humans to perform the task with minimal human intervention.
So, there are, again, a lot of applications of agent-take AI.
So this is what we had covered.
In the, initial part, Then, going to the Next portion.
I will just share the slides.
So, I think I could see a query on the slides on LMS Portal.
So I have shared the slides, today morning. Yesterday it was a little late.
And I'm sure that they will be uploaded very soon on the LMS, so you will find the slides for yesterday on LMS, and also for today. So I will be, sharing, to the concerned Futurance people in the afternoon today, today's slides.
And they'll also be available on LMS, so you may… please not worry, you will find them.
Okay, so let me know.
Share the other slides.
Okay, so I hope you all can… See my screen.
And let me maximize it.
Okay, so yesterday we started with the second portion, which was on data preprocessing and curation.
So, I discussed that there is a requirement of the data to be, quality data, so that the analysis on such a data could yield, good results.
And there are different tasks that can be performed as part of data preprocessing.
Such as data cleaning, Data integration, data transformation, reduction, and discretization.
We started out discussing some of these yesterday.
So, we discussed, in-data cleaning, handling of missing data.
And, we discussed how different percentages of missing values in the given data could impact
the missing value imputation. So we concluded that if the percentage of missing values are very less, then we could actually go with removing
those records. However, removing of records is not a very good solution in case, the missing values are…
Higher in percentage.
So, for example, if the… we discussed that if around 30% of the data has missing values, and in this example, if we remove such rows.
then it is possible that the majority, and if there is a majority of one particular class, like class C2, it is possible that it can become a uniform or almost uniform distribution.
And it can also be possible that one of the classes can be completely lost, and the minority class could become a majority class.
If the percentage of missing values is high.
Then we, talked about other solutions.
So,
So these are just the examples that I had shown to you with different percentages of missing values.
Also, there, we talked about different solutions, for this problem.
So, another solution could be to fill in with a default value.
say, any value, say 100, 9, 10, or whatever. And, we also discussed at length that filling of missing values could actually lead to the creation of a new class in the data if the percentage of the missing value is high.
Then, the next solution was filling, a mean value.
So, when, mean value is filled, again, there is a possibility, and the mean could be a classified mean, or whatever way. There's again a possibility that,
The points that are, the points that get those values that are being filled on the basis of mean.
Are leading to the creation of points, which are very different from the distribution, the regular distribution of the given set of points.
So, filling of, missing values with mean is also not a very good solution.
Then, we, also discussed filling off, missing values using median.
So, when we use median, Then, filling of missing values.
Happens in a better fashion, but it's still not a very good, example, because again, we are creating points which are actually very different from the distribution of the points given to us.
Then we also tried to fill with mode, and we found out, again, that in some cases, it is a good solution, whereas in the other cases, it is not a very good solution.
To do that.
So, then we also talked about
About filling of, missing values using other methods, so mean, median, and mode,
Are somewhat better, but they are not that much better.
Oh… So we, actually were in a need to have other methods also.
Bobby.
And, we talked about filling of mean based on, classes, or class labels for the corresponding attribute, and this came out to be a much better solution.
And even a more better solution was to use probabilistic methods to fill the missing values, and this turned out to be probably the best solution.
That we discussed. So, I think we had finished this much yesterday. Now I'm going to continue with the new portion.
Okay.
So… So, these are the different solutions that we discussed.
Ignoring of the tuple or removing it, then filling, with missing values, some missing values, manually, filling a global constant.
Or, using the mean, median, or mode, using attribute mean, or using the most valuable value to fill the missing value, which turned out to be the best solution.
Now, in data cleaning, in addition to, handling missing value.
The next thing that we wanted to do was handling noisy data.
So, we are going to discuss methods where we are going to handle noisy data.
Just a second… Yeah.
So there are… there can be different ways. One, common way of handling noisy data is to perform binning.
So, in binning, as the word bin implies, bin is a container.
Or a bucket, where we first sort the data points.
And then partition them into groups or bins, or we assume that we are partitioning and putting the points in bins.
And then we can apply different types of smoothing, on the bins.
Which I will discuss as we go along. So, binning is one popular method of handling noisy data, where we just retain the VIN information and do away with the noise.
Then clustering also can be used to remove, noise or outliers.
Regression also can be used to fit a curve, and all the points that do not lie on the fitted, regression function are actually removed as noise points.
So, let's take each of these methods in more details as we go along. So, we have binning, poor, or data smoothing, or removing noise.
Again, in binning, there are different methods to perform binning. So, the first method to perform binning is…
Equiv partitioning, or equivist VIN.
So, in this particular case, what we do is that we take the range of values for that… for the variable that we have to bid. For example, if we have height.
And we want to bin the heights. Then we take the range of values.
Within which the height is falling in the given set of data.
And then, we divide it by the total number of bins that we want to form. For example, here, we are interested to form capital N number of bins.
This doesn't hang up.
So, these are the number of bins that we want to form. So, we will divide the given range of values. Let's say the highest value was B, and the lowest value was A for that particular attribute that we want to bin.
So, the width of the VIN will be given by B minus A divided by N.
So, this is how,
Bins are formed. Just a second.
So, in this particular case, all the winds are having equal, width.
So, what are we trying to do? Let's say, this is the VIN number.
And, what we are having here… is some variable.
And what we try to do is that we try to divide it into equal width Partitions, like this.
So we are actually kind of dividing it into strips.
So, here's an example. Let's assume we have a data in which there are 50 rows. Not all 50 are shown here, some of them are shown here only.
For illustration purpose.
So, equip with binning is to be done on the data, assuming the total number of bins that we want to form is 5.
The minimum age in this data is 20, and the maximum age is 70.
Then, what we will do is, we'll determine the bin size as, you know, given by 50, 70 minus 20, so it will be 70 minus 20.
Divided by 5, which will be 10.
So, the width of the VIN will be 10.
And the different VINs that can be formed will be VIN0, VIN 1, VIN 2, VIN3, VIN 4, which will be of size 10 each, like 20 to 30, 30 to 40, and so on and so forth, till 70.
Now, all the points are assigned to these prints. Say, for example, the age 20.
So, age 20 is going to belong to bin 0, so it is assigned VIN ID 0. So, any age in 20s is assigned to VIN 0. So, we can see here, because the data is sorted, so the initial values will be assigned to… till here, will be assigned to bin 0.
And, so we can assume that, any particular VIN is inclusive of the
upper bound. So, this means that this pin includes values from 20 up to 30.
And any value greater than 30 will come in bin 1. So, up to 30, we are having bin 0.
Similarly, up to 40, we are having bin 2, and so on and so forth. VIN 1, and so on and so forth.
So now, if we visualize this data.
What we can see here is, these are the VIN IDs.
Oh.
Justice.
Yeah, so we have the different VIN IDs, as you can see here.
And, let's say we are binning medical expenses in rupees.
So the medical expenses, when they are binned, Then what we find out?
On the basis of VIN information.
that, these are the five bins, and the crosses show the points that have been assigned to these bins. So these many points are assigned.
to bin 0, bin 1, bin 2, bin 3, and bin 4.
So, so, what are your comments on this kind of assignment?
Any comments or anything that, to note?
Yep.
gunjan bhaiya
gunjan bhaiya
00:39:25
To form an equivalent cluster, like, because the data is going to be in a specific range, so it is, like, a more likely.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:39:32
Okay.
aditya shrivastava
aditya shrivastava
00:39:34
And the distance is less, compared to… the, the life.
The 4 has a distance, lesser than, the… To all.
Three.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:39:50
You're talking about the…
aditya shrivastava
aditya shrivastava
00:39:52
The distance between the.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:39:54
points.
aditya shrivastava
aditya shrivastava
00:39:54
each other, yeah.
Okay. That won't.
gunjan bhaiya
gunjan bhaiya
00:39:58
Intact cluster.
Neeraj Kumar
Neeraj Kumar
00:40:00
Just one question. Have we customized, this, data…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:40:07
Can you come back again, Nina?
Neeraj Kumar
Neeraj Kumar
00:40:09
Yeah, as it seems like that we have categorized that data.
Into…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:40:17
Yeah, so…
Neeraj Kumar
Neeraj Kumar
00:40:18
I agree.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:40:19
Yeah, so actually, bins are kind of, creating categories only.
So, we have now created categories out of our data. One category is people in their 20s up to 30.
People in their 30s up to 40 like that.
And, definitely, we can see the distribution of the points, more or less.
Average number of points in the VIN might be, not exactly equal, but somewhat, uniform.
Of course, the bin 3 and 4 are more populated than bin 0, 1, and 2.
But all the VINs do have points in them.
So, Deepak, do you have a question?
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:41:05
Yeah, I'm just trying to get the relation between binning and the clustering. So, is it somewhere related? Because I think we are doing the same thing here as well.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:41:16
You want to understand, the relationship between bins and clusters?
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:41:21
Yeah, so is it the part of the process, to create a cluster?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:41:28
You can think of them as clusters, but these are kind of static clusters. So, when we perform clustering of the data, we find out the similarity between the points.
And on the basis of the similarity, we cluster them or group them. Here, we are not
finding out any similarity across the points. All we are doing is, based on the value of the attribute.
that we want to bin, we are just assigning the bin ID, some bin ID, to the point. So, there is no point-to-point similarity that is getting calculated here. So, binning is not exactly clustering. However, it does form groups in some way.
But these are not exactly clusters.
Is it okay?
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:42:13
Sure, sure. Thank you.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:42:15
Yeah.
Then, of course, while my circles were there, so there can be points, I mean, so these points, for example.
Either they could be considered… so here, since we are not talking about,
Anomaly detection, so we are assuming all the points to be regular or normal points. So, we may not say that they are outliers, but if required, they can be treated as outliers if they are really different from the rest of the points. As of now, we are assuming that there are no outliers in the data.
So, actually, all of them will be form of… will be part of the VIN.
All the points. So, even though my circles got a little smaller.
Okay, so Neil, what question do you have?
Sunil Saini
Sunil Saini
00:43:05
Yeah, hello, ma'am. So, I'm just trying to understand, so…
What is the noise in this data? What we are trying to do here?
When we are dividing it into the bins.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:43:16
So, so actually, noise points are removed. Yeah, so if we are doing denoising using binning, which is what I started out with.
So, actually, what is happening here is that there are, let's say if we were to plot these points, like this, let's say, then they would be, like, jittery, right? There will be points here in all the range, like this.
So, what are we doing? We are smoothing it out by replacing it with some value.
And that value would be the VIN ID. Say, I call this, you know, this as all the values inside this, I'm replacing it with some range, R1, and I call it VIN0. All these values I'm replacing with some other…
So, like this, we are actually removing all the jitter and just replacing them by these VIN IDs.
So, we are kind of smoothing this data, replacing all these jitters with these simple numbers. This is how we are denoising the data here.
Sunil Saini
Sunil Saini
00:44:20
Okay, so I think it is somewhat related to the classes or clusters.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:44:26
So, once again, I'll say that in clustering, we try to look at the similarity of the points. Here, we are not looking at similarity, we are just dividing the given range, which I already showed you. If this is the highest value, this is the lowest value, we just subtract them and divide them by the total number of bins to be formed.
So this gives us the width of the bin, and then based on the width, we just keep on assigning points. You can visualize it like this. Let's say if I have 5 bins, you think of 5 buckets. And let's say if you have some colored balls.
then each bucket is going to hold one particular color. So, as you have the balls in your hand, you keep tossing it in the respective bucket. If there's a bucket for white balls, you toss it in the… and you have a white ball with you, then you toss it in the respective bucket, and like that.
So, instead of having all the balls separately with different colors, now what we have are buckets, and we just handle the buckets rather than the individual balls. So, similarly here.
We are having bins or buckets, we, just place the points in each of these bins, and then forget about the points, and we are only interested to retain the bin information, and we are going to use that only. So, in a way, we are kind of categorizing the data.
from, continuous valued, you know, range to a range, which is, finite ranges. Like, for example, if we talk about
the age from 20 up to 30, then there could be infinite values. Instead of that, I'm replacing it by one value, 0.
Like that.
Sunil Saini
Sunil Saini
00:46:07
Yeah, good idea, thanks.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:46:12
So then,
We have another, example where we are talking about, daily, screen time and sleep duration.
And, the dependent variable here is sleep duration.
So,
So, sleep duration is what is going to be the dependent variable, and the rest of the screen time's independent variable. The total number of points that are given are 52, and the screen time range is given.
And then,
We want to form 6 wins, and according to that, according to the equivalent binning, we divide the given set of points from the highest to the lowest value.
into 6. So the ranges that we get are shown here.
And, now, when we do equip binning.
Then, we have these ranges.
Right? We have these ranges with us, and when we try to accommodate the points in these ranges, then this is the distribution that you are seeing here. So, this graph shows the distribution.
So, before I proceed, I could see a hand raised. Is there any question?
Okay, G2, what do you want?
JT
Jithu Tagore
00:47:42
About that binning already, like, when the data distribution is large, we are binning the data to small sets, and we'll be analyzing only that particular range of values, right?
For that one, we are using Building, right?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:47:58
Yes, so we are… as of now, binning is used in a lot of things. As of now, I've talked about denoising the data by ignoring the individual values and only retaining the VIN IDs. And these VIN IDs will be used for further analysis, okay?
Okay, so now I'm just showing you another example of EQ with winning.
So, any comments on this kind of winning?
On equivalent winning on this particular data.
Pallavi Chakravarty
Pallavi Chakravarty
00:48:34
Yes, so…
Unlike the earlier example here, it seems all the points are concentrated on bin 4 and 5.
And… So, here, binning is not a good representation of the
screen time, in this case. So if we replace…
The actual screamtimes with these beans, it would appear all of them are only dependent on 4 and 5, which kind of makes the other beans.
Not useful.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:49:08
Yeah, so what you're saying is correct, Pallavi?
So, if we are using EQ with binning.
In this particular case, then what are we having? We are having most of the points are crowded in these two bins.
Whereas the other VINs are practically empty.
So remember why we want to form the bins. We want to form the bins so that we uniformly distribute the… so we should not have bins just for the sake of having them. Here, we have formed bins like bin 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4.
And these VINs are kind of just formally there, but they don't really have much points in them. 1-1 point, or there might be a… it is… it is also possible that there might be a VIN having no points at all.
in it.
And therefore, equiwith binning in this particular case, where the data distribution is such, is not very useful, because some bins are practically empty, whereas others are crowded. So this defies the
Logic-affirming bins.
So that's why, in this case, EQ with winning is not a good solution.
Okay, Deepak, what question do you have?
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:50:22
Yeah, I think on a similar line, that…
So basically, the purpose of bailing is to categorize data, or make it more simplistic, so that we can do the next set of process, like clustering or whatever it is. But in this scenario, probably the data distribution is
Like, there's huge difference, where, you know, we see few points on one line.
And 4 and 5 has used. So we would ignore this step. Am I right on saying this?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:50:53
I couldn't understand what step you want to ignore here.
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:50:57
The billing, the process of billing, or categorizing data.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:51:01
In this dataset, you are saying?
Deepak Katara
Deepak Katara
00:51:04
Yes, yes.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
00:51:05
Okay, so the… we want to bin the data.
right, we have to form the bins. But when we are using equivalent winning, definitely the meaning of winning is getting defied, because there are practically these two bins that are having points, and most of the points are coming in these two bins, and the rest of the bins are
you know, just practically empty. You can also take another example. Suppose, we want to bin the students in a particular course. Let's not talk about PG certification, because there are a variety of
people from different backgrounds, but let's say we have students in BTEC 4th year, and we want to win them on the basis of age.
And we re… we use EQI with billing.
So, if we are using EEP with winning on the students of BTEC 4th year.
On the basis of age, then what would happen?
We may form n number of bins, but mostly all of them, because they'll have similar ages.
All the points will, you know, form part of a single bin only. Mostly single bin, not even two.
So, therefore, the purpose of forming bins is lost, because
VINs are there, but they are not having any points, so this is a useless scenario.
So, but we have to perform binning, so,
So, we have to look at some other way of forming bins, and equal with binning is not the solution that is good here.
So then, so, we already discussed, the impact of Equivor's winning.
In certain datasets, in which case the…
Points are in… are given in such a way that all of them form part of one single bin, or
Some few bins, and the rest of the bins are empty.
So then, since equi with binning is not suitable, in many cases, we have to go for another… some other form of binning, and what we have is equidepth binning.
Equid depth binning is also called equi-frequency binning, where
We do not divide the given range of values into equal-sized bins. Rather, we divide the given ranges
In such a way that each range of values forms one bin, and approximately the total number of samples
per VIN are equal.
So, here we are talking about frequency, of the points in the VINs.
And we are not talking about the width of the bin, so we don't look at the range of values. Rather, we look at the total number of points in the bin.
Sorry, I got muted here.
So, in this particular case, we are interested to form the bins, but equal, width binning is not going to serve the purpose, so we have equal depth or equal frequency binning.
In which case, the number of samples per VIN are going to be approximately equal, and when such a number, is achieved in any VIN, there we cut the VIN boundary.
So, we don't have regular VIN boundaries of equal width, but they are based on frequency.
So, for example,
Let's say that, we have certain, the same set of points that we discussed earlier.
And we have the screen time, then we have the sleep duration, and the points are actually sorted on sleep duration.
And then we have the VIN IDs that were assigned to them based on equivalent binning, and then we have equi frequency binning.
So, in case of frequency binning, we are going to associate, we first sort the data and associate equal number of points per bin. In this particular case, we had 52 points, and we wanted to form 5 bins, so approximately 10 points are accommodated per bin.
So, and accordingly, when 10 points are accommodated, then the VIN boundary is
found out. So, once there are 10 points, then we look at the… what are the range of values of, of the points
for that particular attribute, because they are all sorted, and use that VIN boundary as
the range of values for that particular VIN. Similarly, the next VIN, next VIN, like that. So here, we are focusing on the frequency of points, so you can see that, more or less, all the VINs are uniformly packed.
For example, in this spin, you're not able to see many points because they are lying one on top of the other.
So, like this. So, these are the winds formed. All of them are equally populated.
And there are no VINs that are empty, or no VINs that are sparse or overly crowded. They're all equal.
So, equal depth binning is used when we have the likelihood of having all points falling in the same range
for that, for some particular attribute that is used for binning. If that is the case, then don't use equal width binning, use equal depth binning, or some other form of binning.
So, I think this is the example. I already showed it to you.
Now, there are other methods also to form, VINs. For example,
We partition the given data, we have the price of some item in INR, so first step would be to sort them in some order, let's say in the increasing order.
And then we partition into equidepth, bins. So, when we, talk about equidepth means equal number of points are going to be put per bin.
So here, we are going to put 4 4 points per VIN, because the total number of points are 12, so first 4 points, then next 4 points, like that, we will keep on doing, just a second.
I'll choose mine.
I'm just choosing my pen.
So, this is about equidepth binning, using these points. Then we have other methods, like smoothing by bin means. So, first, we actually partition the given data into equidepth bins, and then we denoise the bins so that
We are doing smoothing on the points by VIN mean. So, we look at all these points, find out the VIN mean.
Let's say 9 is the VIN mean, then we replace all the points by 9. So, it looks something like this.
Let's say these are the points.
You know, these are the values that we are having.
So, what do we do? We have some number of bins that we want to form. Let's say 3 number of bins are to be formed. So, these are the 3 bins.
And we replace each bin by the mean. So what would we have? These are the points, so this is the VIN mean.
This may be the VIN mean for the next VIN.
This has been one.
This is VIN 2, this is VIN 3, and then this is also replaced by the mean value. So now, these are the VINs that we are having here.
Right? So, like this, we do smoothing by VIN means, and we, lose the jitters in the data.
Here. So now, the next thing, is, binning by VIN boundaries.
So, we can do a binning on VIN boundaries.
So, whatever the value, let's say the VIN boundary for this VIN is either 4 or 15. So, whatever the other values are, if 8 is more closer to 4 than to 15, 8 will be replaced by 4.
Similarly, 9, if it is…
Now, nearer to 4 than to 15, then it will be replaced by 4, because we can see that 9 minus 4 is 5, and 15 minus 9 is 6.
So 9 is closer to 4 than to 5, so we replace it by 4.
Like this, we do smoothing using VIN boundaries. So these are some different ways. There are so many other ways also possible. I'm just showing some of them.
Then, the other method to do noise removal is to perform clustering on the given data.
When we cluster the given data, then we see
That the point that is a noise point will not be part of any cluster, and it will be excluded, and we can remove this as noise.
Then, using regression for removing noise, so we have these points, which are shown here. We fit a model, or a curve line, on it. It could be linear, nonlinear. Here, it is a linear, line.
And, now this 9 is retained, which is given by Y is equal to X plus 1.
And all those points which are not lying on this line are actually ignored or removed as noise points.
So, in regression, we try to minimize the distance
So, here, we want to minimize the distance between the model that we have found and the points.
We want to minimize these… these distances, some of such distances.
This is the idea to fit our line, on most of the points.
Okay.
So, here's a diagrammatic representation. Let's say we have points which are shown there, and these points are actually shown in this purple graph.
Then, we could use different form of…
regression, like logarithmic, exponential, and so on and so forth, and accordingly, different lines will be there, which represent the regression models that have been fitted on these points. And the model is written, and the points are ignored from further analysis.
Okay. So that was about, denoising of the data. Any questions, anyone?
About denoising.
Dilip S Biradar
Dilip S Biradar
01:02:23
Dilip here, while learning Python, we understood the, DF command to, use the value from the previous, the next record. So, when that will be used, in general.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:02:39
Are you talking about when… what Python command to use, or your… I couldn't understand what you wanted to ask.
Okay, for example, we have a record for which one field is missing.
Dilip S Biradar
Dilip S Biradar
01:02:54
So, we can use the value from the previous record from the same field, or we can use the value from the next record to fill that value, like that.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:03:05
Hmm.
Dilip S Biradar
Dilip S Biradar
01:03:05
Tamara ambulance, or any, any application we have here about…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:03:10
So let's say you have, you know, let's say you have some data here.
And these are the different values, and this is attribute A1, and this is the missing value, and you're having value 1 here, and maybe value 2 here. So what you are saying is to fill this value, you could use this value.
Or you could use this value, something like that.
Dilip S Biradar
Dilip S Biradar
01:03:34
So, yeah. So.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:03:37
this, can… such kind of filling of missing values can only be used when you have dependency in the attribute. Let's say, I have an attribute.
Which represents the sales.
And that sales is for different countries.
Right? So, let's say, I don't know why it's not coming. So, I have got 3 countries.
Let's say one is India.
One is USA.
And one is UK.
And I have a missing value in USA, whereas there are values for India and UK. Now, in the scenario that you mentioned.
Would it be logical to use the sales of, of, over India for that product to be… to fill the sales in USA, or the sales of UK to fill sales in USA?
Will it be logical?
Let's say we talk Yeah, yeah. So…
Because sales in different countries are uncorrelated, they don't have any relationship, even if the product is same.
Even if we talk about sales of, let's say, any food item.
Say chips. So, the sales in India versus sales in UK or USA will be different. Even if the brand is the same, the chips type is the same, and all that stuff.
So, in not all cases you can use, but you can use this kind of a thing when I'm having a time series with me.
Let's say, here I'm having sales.
For a product.
I don't know why I'm facing problems with my digital pen, sorry for that.
So, these are sales of one particular product, and this is time T1 time T2,
Time T3, and so on and so forth. This is time 0.
So, if we talk about sales of a product over different instances of time, and we have a missing value here at time T2.
then we can definitely use value from T1 or T3 to decide what needs to be filled here.
In that case, you can do this, because the data is having a dependency.
In sales over time. So, if such kind of dependencies exist, then you can use this method. Otherwise, you can't use it, okay?
Dilip S Biradar
Dilip S Biradar
01:06:07
Yep, thank you.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:06:08
Yep.
So, let's talk about data transformation. In data transformation, we apply.
laxmi sahu
laxmi sahu
01:06:14
Sorry to interrupt. Just in case we don't have data, like, time dependency.
So, what we will do in that scenario?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:06:26
Yeah, so if you don't have time dependency, then I already discussed so many cases how to fill missing values. For example, remove the record containing missing values, fill with a default value, fill with a mean, median, mode.
Filled with mean per attribute, I mean, per class, and all that. That is for uncorrelated data only.
laxmi sahu
laxmi sahu
01:06:48
Okay, good.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:06:51
Okay. So, let's talk about data transformation. Here, we try to…
Transform or change… not exactly change the data distribution, but modify the data in such a way.
That it is more,
More applicable, or it is better suited for analysis.
So in this, there are many techniques, like data aggregation, normalization of the data, attribute construction, and so on and so forth, and we'll talk about each of these as we go along.
So, first transformation on the data is data normalization.
So, data normalization means… That we are actually, mapping
One range of the data to some other range.
For example, initially, our values were, belonging to, the initial value was min value A, and max value A for the attribute A.
No.
I want to map it to Newman A, And new max A.
I want to do this, so how can I do it? I can do it with min-max normalization, where any value mu prime, is given as mu minus min A divided by max minus min into
into new max A minus new min A plus new max. So, actually, here, what are we doing? Mapping one range of values to the other. For example, if I've got sales.
In INR.
And I've got sales in USD,
And I want to map them both to the same units.
Then, either I want to map INR to UST or UST to INR, then I can use min-max normalization.
to bring the values to the same range, where mini, min, and max A designate the minimum and maximum values for the attribute A
initially, and then new min A and new max A are the values that are the new values
That are to be used.
Where we want to map them.
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:09:15
What is me, ma'am?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:09:18
Sorry, the new, you are saying?
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:09:20
No, what is V?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:09:22
So that is any value.
So, the new value is given by new prime, or V prime, whatever. This is the initial value.
So, we'll subtract the minimum value, then divide it by the original range, multiply it by the new range, and add the minimum value of the new range. So, in a way, what are we doing? We're actually, first removing the offset
Of the original range from the given value, and then mapping it to a new range, and offsetting it with a new minimum.
This is what we are doing in min-max novelization.
Then we also have z-score normalization, where we have, the value V given as V', which is, the value minus mean over the attribute, say, A, divided by standard deviation. So, this is also another method.
Many times, marks are normalized using z-score normalization.
And, this is not the entire list, we have many other methods also.
However, I'm just including some important ones.
Chandrasekhar Sahu
Chandrasekhar Sahu
01:10:31
So then…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:10:32
Bumpkin.
Chandrasekhar Sahu
Chandrasekhar Sahu
01:10:33
You know, we have one example for normalization?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:10:37
Yeah, I think I… I do have some graphs. I'll show you.
Chandrasekhar Sahu
Chandrasekhar Sahu
01:10:41
Just, if you'll wait for a little while, I'll be able to show you examples on some graphs, yeah.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:10:49
So then, the application of minimax is to convert one range to a new range.
And the application of z-score normalization is to compare, two scores, that are coming from different normal distributions.
And, we use z-score normalization in that case.
So,
So, here's an example. Let's say we have the data as shown here, where we have X and Y as the two variables, and we want to do min-max normalization as well as z-score normalization. As I already mentioned that z-score normalization is going to center the data
Around the mean, or around zero. So we are subtracting the original mean value from it, so that what we are having is only the fluctuations around the mean.
So, and then we scale it on the basis of the standard deviation.
This is how we get z-score normalization. So, let's, see.
This is the data, original data, with minimum and maximum values given as 1 and 20 for X and Y, and for Y… for X, and accordingly for Y also.
Just a second, I don't know what's happening.
Yes, Damon, please.
Now, we, perform min-max normalization.
And, thank you.
So, the initial range of values is 1 to 20 and 1 to 25, and we want to map these values to a new range.
Which is from 5 to 25 for the X coordinates, and 10 to 40 for the Y coordinates. So the minimum was 1, we want to map it to 5, this one.
And maximum is 20, we want to map it to.
You know, what's going wrong with my… spend today.
Yeah, and we want to map it to 25, so 20, we want to map to 25.
Similarly, Y is 1, we want to map it to 10, 25, we want to map to 40. This is how we want to perform the…
Mapping. So you can see here, this is the original data shown in the yellow color.
And it's starting with 1, and ending with 20.
For the x-axis, and for the y-axis, it starts with 1, And ends with 25 here.
This is 25.
Now, we want the minimum value to be 5, so we are going to perform min-max normalization, and this point is actually going to be mapped to the new minimum, which is 5. So this is actually mapped to 5.
5 on the x-axis, and 10 on the y-axis. So this is the 10 value, this is the 5 value, this is the point.
So we start from here, and we end the data with
The new minimum value, the maximum value is 40. So it was 25 initially, now this has got mapped to 40 out here. So this is the new, mapped values we get.
From the given data. The thing to notice is that initially the range was 25 minus 1, and now the range is 40 minus 10.
Okay, so this is how we perform min-max normalization.
If we have to perform z-score normalization on the same data, then…
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:14:37
Sorry, ma'am, to disturb you. Can you please go back to the previous slide?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:14:42
Can we see how this new mean X is getting calculated?
Yeah, so you just have to use this formula.
So you have, the value minus the minimum value divided by the original range into new range plus the new minimum. For example, you have a point
The initial point is X is equal to 1, Y is equal to 1.
Right? So, the new value will be the old value. You can see this formula, which is actually
The minimum value. So, this new value will be…
If we talk about 1… the X value, that will be 1 minus
So, here, it is a given value. Let's say I… you can just use this formula. So, let's say I talk about the point 2 and 3.
Okay.
Then it will be the original value minus the minimum value, which will be
For this particular case, the original minimum value is 1, so we'll subtract 1.
divided by… Just a second, I'm facing some issues with this.
divided by the original range. What is the original range? For X, it is 20 minus 1, so it is going to be 19.
I'm actually trying to write a 9 here.
Yeah.
this multiplied by the new range. The new range is going from We are having the…
The new range going from 5 to 25. So…
this will be the new range, which will be 25 minus 5, plus the minimum value of the new range. So what we'll have here, 1 upon 19,
into 20.
plus 5, so it will be 5… 5 point, I mean, 5 plus 1 point something, so it will be around 6.
That is the point 2, 3.
So, this is the point 2, 3.
In the original data, here.
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:16:52
This is a point in… But how to decide the new meanings and new meanwhile?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:16:59
Sorry, how do you decide what?
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:17:00
to reset new minimum X and new maximum X.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:17:04
that is the range that you want to map the data into, right? Suppose, I have, you know, the value… let's say I've got values for different variables, like, for example, I've got height.
Then I've got weight.
And maybe I've got age. All of them will have different ranges, right? And, I want to compare them. So then, in that case, it is possible that I may want to bring them to some similar ranges, so that, because age may range, let's say, from 1 to 100,
And weight may range, again, from, let's say, 10 to 100, or maybe 200.
And height may range from… in feet from something, let's say, 2 feet to 7 feet, or 6.5.
So, what can happen is, with these different ranges, some particular attribute will become dominant, for example, weight or age. So, to prevent that, we might want them to, scale them to the same range, so that new range will be decided by you only.
Right? Or the user.
Whosoever wants to use, whatever, but what I'm showing you is how to do… how to calculate when you have the new range with you.
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:18:22
Yep. About it, ma'am. Thank you.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:18:24
Okay So I request all of you to please,
write on the chat, and I will… so that it doesn't disrupt the flow of explanation, and I'll take questions in between. I'll stop and take. In case the chat is disabled, I'll request the Futurance co-host to please enable the chat so that people can write.
On the chat for any doubts.
Okay, so this is z-score normalization. Here, what we are doing is…
that we are bringing, all the data into the range of 0 to 1, something like that. So… so you can see the data was spread over this much range, now it has been brought to this range. So this is how ZScore normalization works.
Then, the next thing that we will talk about is dimensionality reduction. It's a very, very important topic.
And there are many methods to do it. One important way is doing… using feature selection. Another is to use feature construction.
So, what is feature selection? Feature selection means we have certain attributes that are given in the data.
And we select some important attributes.
and retain those, and just ignore the rest of them. So, we are actually finding out an important subset
Of attributes from the given set, and using that only to represent the data, and ignoring the others. This is feature selection. So we are doing a select operation, or we are doing a selection from the entire set.
Then, comes feature construction or feature extraction. So, in feature construction, what we do is that we actually form new features out of the given data.
So, how do we form new features? There can be different methods. For example, we might map the given points into, you know, some other coordinate plane completely.
So, we may form new features. For example, if we have text data, then we can represent this text, in some way. For example, by sets of keywords, or something like that. So, the original data was the text document, and it got mapped to new features by some method.
Okay, so feature construction and extraction means deriving a completely new set of features from the given data.
Now, what is dimensionality reduction? Dimensionality reduction means we are reducing the number of attributes or the dimensions in the data.
So that the data becomes more easy to handle, to archive, to access, and all that.
So, when we are doing feature selection or feature construction, we may be also doing dimensionality reduction. For example, if I've got some 30 attributes with me, out of these 30, I'm retaining only 5
And doing a feature selection in which 5 gets selected, and rest of the, 25 are not so important, and they are ignored. Then I'm reducing the dimensions from 30 to 5.
This is what is dimension reduction, and it's very important
Because higher the dimensionality, it's more difficult to handle the data.
And it's also very difficult to visualize such high-dimensional data.
Hmm.
And so on and so forth.
So, here's an example of feature selection.
We are assuming that, we are building a decision tree.
How we'll actually build a decision tree, I will be showing you.
in the chapter on supervised learning. However, I've just, for illustration, shown one here. So, the initial attribute sets are A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A6. So, there are six attributes given to us, and we want to do a feature selection.
There can be many methods to perform feature selection, and one of them is this, where we try to build a decision tree, and all the attributes that are represented
on the tree, or are utilized in building the tree, are retained, and the rest of them are ignored. Because when we build a decision tree, we
actually use this to classify the data. And if 3 attributes are enough to form… to arrive at the class labels, then the others are just redundant, and we can ignore. So this means that we can ignore A2,
Then we can ignore A3.
then we can ignore A5. So, we are left with Avon?
then A3… A4 and A6. So we are left…
With 50% of the attributes, and we have done attribute selection out here.
While the sanctity of the data is still getting maintained, because the rest of the attributes are kind of redundant for us.
So we ignore them. There are many other methods also, we'll be discussing them as we go along.
Then, then there are methods for data reduction.
So data reduction is another thing that is required if the data is very huge. We somehow want to reduce it so that it becomes, smaller, and it becomes easier to handle.
A huge amount of data could also be compute-intensive, and if there can be some methods by which we can reduce the data, it will definitely help.
And one such method is numerosity reduction. So, numerosity reduction, so here we… numerosity means numbers. If we can somehow reduce
The numbers in the data, then we are talking about numerosity reduction.
So, how can we do that? There are two methods. One is parametric methods, the others are non-parametric methods. What are parametric methods? Here, what we do is we take the entire data, that may be some, let's say we have got some 1 lakh records with us.
And, these are a huge number, and therefore, we somehow want to reduce the data. So what we do is we fit a model on that data.
And after fitting the model, we just… and to fit the model, we do, parameter estimation that may be hyperparameters or other parameters that may require to model the data.
We find out those parameters, model the data, and retain the model, and discard
The individual, the actual points.
So we don't really keep the points, we just keep the model with us, because that's a good representation.
Assuming that's a good representation of the data, and then just,
use the model and forget about the points. So these are parametric methods, because here we have to assess the parameters that are involved
In making up a model.
Then we also have, non-parametric methods. So, non-parametric methods are those where we do not build any models and do not need to estimate any parameters of the models.
For example, clustering. So, in clustering, we just form the clusters or groups out of the given data. So, there are no parameters or hyperparameters that need to be estimated
In such methods, all we need to do is just cluster the data, or if we are doing some histograms out of the data, we just form the histograms, but we are not using any other hyperparameters or any other parameter estimation here. Therefore, such methods are called
non-parametric methods, and all these methods help to reduce the volume of the data. For example, in the parametric methods, the volume gets represented by our single model, or a set of models.
In the non-parametric methods, the entire set of or volume of data gets represented by some few clusters.
So, in both these cases, we are actually reducing the volume of the data.
So, we can, also perform numerosity reduction, as I mentioned here, not just by clustering, by also forming histograms. Now, what are histograms? Histograms are nothing but, again, they are similar to bins only.
And, the method to form histogram is, again, similar to the methods for binning, which I've already told you, that we could do binning by equi-with binning, or by equifrequency binning, and so on and so forth.
And similar methods can be used to form histograms. Often, histograms are done on counts, or frequency-based histograms are very, very popular.
Methods of data reduction, where we retain the histogram, and we just do away with the actual
Volume of the data.
So, this is a histogram that I had shown you already, where I'm… I've done the histogram based on the first alphabet of your first name.
for all this group of students, and we find out that the histogram for the alphabet S is having the maximum count in it, or frequency of values, followed by A, M, RM, and so on and so forth. We
Okay, so before I, proceed, any questions on what I just discussed?
Maybe you can write on the chat?
Okay, so what I'll do is I'll proceed and then invite questions once again.
As we progress.
So now, another form of performing data reduction is by sampling.
So, what is sampling? Sampling of the data is… so, let's say we have got some millions of points with us. It's really very difficult to handle a huge amount of data. So, instead of having the entire set of millions of points, we could have a good representative subset of this data.
And retain the subset rather than retaining all those millions of points.
Now, how can the subset be formed?
One way of forming the subset is doing simple random sampling. So what we do out of the given set of points, whatever the number is, let's say 1 million or 1 lakh, we just randomly select some points.
And, retain it as a representative subset of the given data.
So the method looks very simple and nice. However, the primary problem with this simple random sampling is that, let's say, the data distribution is skewed.
Let's say that in certain ranges of values are very less. In some other ranges, the values are very high in number.
And when we do a random sampling, it is possible that some of the lower range values get lost because they never were selected in the random sample.
Right, so then, in that case, the distribution of the data will get modified, and we don't want to modify the data distribution. What we want to do is get a representative subset of the given data.
And reduce the volume of the data by doing sampling.
So then, random, sampling, simple random sampling, is a good, and, a good method, which is intuitive, and understandable. However, it doesn't work when the
data distribution is skewed. So, in such cases, we can use something called stratified sampling.
So, stratified sampling means that, let's say we have got two classes in the data. One class is majority class, where 80% of the samples belong to class C1.
Let's say we have 80% of the samples, Belonging to Class C1.
And the rest of the 20% samples belong to Class C2.
Now, when we are doing a stratified sample, assuming, let's say, we have got a total of 100 samples.
Then, the ratio in which the samples are 80s to 20. Now, suppose I want to draw a stratified sampling, and I want to reduce the data to 50%. Let's say now I want only 50 samples. So, what I'll do.
I will pick samples from each of this group in the ratio of the size of that group. For example, the size of this group is 0.8, and this is 0.2.
So 40%… so 80% of the samples should come from this group, and 20% should come from this group, so that the distribution, overall distribution, of the class labels remains the same.
So, this means if I want to make 50 samples, I will draw 40 from here, and 10 from here. So, in this case, the distribution remains the same, because the
The…
The amount of Class C1 and C2 samples are similar to the original distribution, which is 80-20%.
So, stratified sampling is used when we have skewed data distribution. Most of the real-world data is skewed in nature, as you all already know.
Then, another method of, doing, data reduction.
is by, doing, so if we have here the raw data, we are again illustrating… sorry, this is not… So, clustering is also another method of doing, sampling. So, this is the raw data, where we have got 3
classes or clusters available in the data. So if we do a stratified sample, then samples will be drawn from each of these classes in the same ratio as they are available in the original data.
And therefore, you will see, let's say if this was class C1, this is C2, and this is C3. Then, in the final data also, after doing the random sampling, we still have all these classes in the data, and none of the classes will go missing.
Because in random sampling, we just randomly pick, but in stratified sampling, we pick the points in the ratio in which they are available in the original data.
Okay, any questions, anyone, on whatever we have discussed?
Ankit Sood
Ankit Sood
01:33:32
Ma'am, I have a questionnaire.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:33:34
Yeah.
Ankit Sood
Ankit Sood
01:33:35
So, like, we are doing this data reduction, right? So, what are the activities where data reduction will come handy? Because I was under the assumption the more the data, better the machine learning model.
But if we are reducing the data, then we are reducing the number of samples on which we are training the model as well, right? For decision tree that you mentioned, I understand that some of the attributes are not having any details or any…
implication on the machine learning model. But how this will help?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:34:07
Okay.
Definitely, we generally say that the more the data, the better will be the learning.
That is true. Why? Because we want to have
Data samples that represent each and every use case.
In the given data, right? So that's what, what I'm saying is, let's say that we are having some, you know, the Aadhar, or let's not talk about ADHAR, we are having some data
Say tweets, and there are millions of tweets from the given dataset.
So it's, so if we have to analyze the tweets to find out what the topic of discussion
It's going to take a huge amount of compute
Or, probably the algorithm will keep running for days, and you won't be able to get your result in time.
So, in all such cases, We can, perform data reduction.
In such a way that the overall distribution of the data in the classes that is there doesn't change.
So, here in this case, we are just making a smaller sample to make the data more easily handy, you know, easy for handling. Say, if we have a sample of the data, then we can use it for different purposes, say, clustering, classification.
Or any other purpose. So, this is where data reduction comes into.
picture.
It is not just this. Suppose we want to do exploratory data analysis, or EDA, on the data.
So, it will be very difficult to do EDA, let's say, on millions of points. So, we may want to reduce the data and get a set which is a good representative of the original set, so we can easily perform EDA on it. So, here also, data reduction is handy.
So, there are many such cases where data reduction is important, and it is handy for us. So, in all such cases, we perform
Data reduction by different methods. Sampling is one of them.
Zootopia?
Ankit Sood
Ankit Sood
01:36:12
So, yeah, so we are saying that the time to result is what we are prioritizing over accuracy.
So that's why we are going with data reduction. Second thing is the exploratory data analysis would be easier to do, over the smaller data set.
And that's why we are using it, right?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:36:30
Yeah, these are two reasons. There are many other reasons also, and definitely compute time will be less if
The amount of data will be the same. However, the data distribution is still the same. The most important thing is that when we are drawing a sample of the
given data, it should not happen that the sample's distribution is different from the original data distribution. So that we must not change. That is why we go for stratified sample, where
All the classes are retained in the data that is there in the original data.
Ankit Sood
Ankit Sood
01:37:06
comes from…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:37:08
Yep.
So I can see,
That, Sivanch, you have some question, can you please ask what you want to know?
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:37:17
Yeah, sure. So, I was just thinking about, data sets for min-max normalization. Let's say, if I have data like 10 to 2,
From 2 to 10, 20.
And
Let's say my training set is having this done as a max value and 2 as a min value.
Oh… And the test value as is provided to be as 15 by the model.
And… and when we are trying to calculate the…
the min-max normalization value from that formula which I showed. It gives some a fractional number.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:37:57
Yeah.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:37:57
Is this acceptable, for… to apply this approach, or it will not work in such type of data, so it's a million?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:38:05
You're talking about datasets where you get fractions and not numbers, is that what you're saying?
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:38:12
Yeah, with the formula, I mean,
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:38:13
Yeah, with the.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:38:14
I'll be good track.
Yes.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:38:17
Yeah, see, if you are having one range, let's say your initial range is, let's say 10 to, say, 50, and you want to map these values to a range, like.
Say, 1, 2, say 10. Let's see.
Then, definitely, something that was 10 year is coming to 1, then it will be a fraction only, no? So, having fractions is not a problem.
As long as we are allowing any kind of values. Suppose we don't want, values in points.
as per our algorithm, then it's different. Otherwise, it's okay to do that, because we ourselves decide what is a new range. If the new range is compressed, then some of the larger values which are there in the original range will come out in points only.
So that's fine.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:39:11
Okay.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:39:13
Okay. And one question I have related to binning.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:39:17
Oh, what I understood is we are… today we have covered about numerical
result for techniques of those spinning equi… width and equi frequency. So, in the…
EQ frequency case, what happens if the dataset contains many repeated value?
At the VIN boundaries.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:39:40
Okay, so you're talking about equip frequency binning, right? Right. And… and we are talking about values that are repeatedly coming.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:39:49
Alright.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:39:49
So that's okay, accordingly. See, in case of equi frequency binning, the bins may not be of equal width. Only the frequency remains… wants… is to be remaining the same. So let's say in the range of, let's say 1 to 10, we are having lots of values, say 999 coming again and again.
Then, what are we going to do?
So, the frequency, or the count that we want to keep on the VIN will depend on the average values we are expecting per bin. Let's say we already know, we have the data with us, and we want to bin it, and we know that
a lot of 9 values are coming in, yeah. So, accordingly, we'll bin the data, so that the rest of the bins will have also similar
distribution. However, we have to keep the count. I mean, if we are having 10 values, which are, 10 numbers, which are, you know, having the same value, it has to be put in the same bin only. We cannot ignore them.
They will account for the frequency.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:40:59
Understood. One last question,
Just, having thought is, can we consider the negative values in this binning method, changes, or it's for…
Positive natural valve numbers.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:41:14
You can have any kind of range. The range will accordingly work, because what we are doing, we are subtracting the maximum minus the minimum value. If the minimum is negative, it will get added to the range, so that's no problem.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:41:28
Okay, thank you. So you could have values going from minus 1 to 10 also in the new range.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:41:34
So, because minus 1 to 10 means it is a set of 11 values, so it will be 10 minus minus 1, which will be 11.
So that's okay.
Shivansh Sharma
Shivansh Sharma
01:41:43
Okay, thank you.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:41:47
So then, we talked about, so far, different methods for data reduction, like sampling, like numerosity reduction.
Using, parametric methods, non-parametric methods, and so on and so forth.
So, another way to do data reduction is by data discretization. What is data discretization? Again, it's similar to binning only.
I can explain it with the help of binarization. Let's say that, you know, I have got to… I've got to represent the data in form of two numbers. Let's say I have a range of values from 0 to 10, but I want to represent this using binary values.
So, I can do this in a couple of ways. One way could be anything from 0 up to 5 could be 0, and anything, greater than 5 up to 10
Could be one.
So here, we are actually binarizing the data from 0 to 10 to 0 and 1 to values.
So, we all know that computers work on binary data, and whatever is the actual value, it is represented in form of binary numbers. So, binarization is a simple example, or a special case of discretization.
However, discretization may not just be binarization. It could be analyzation. Say, for example.
I have the range 0 to 15, and I want to represent it in 3 sets, in 3 discrete value sets. So what I could do, I could have 0 up to 5 as 1 set, then greater than 5 up to
10 as another set.
greater than… and then greater than 10 up to 15 in another set. This could be, the discrete value represented by 0, 1, and 2.
So, here, binning is being used, or we also call it discretization, where we are representing this, infinite number of values in each of these range by a finite value, or a discrete value, which is like 0, 1, 2, something.
And this can also be said to be a label that we are assigning to all the points in this range. So this is called discretization of the given data, and we use it to convert a set of continuous valued,
attribute to a categorical attribute. Let's say I've got, say, high, age.
Right? So, let's say age ranges from 1 to 100.
So there could be infinite points in this range, but I want to represent a data by a finite set so that I can do some calculations over it.
Having an infinite value set is very difficult to handle, so what I can do, I can discretize it into 10 bins, or 10 ranges, say 1 to 10,
then greater than 10, up to 20, greater than 20, up to 30, like that. So I'll have 10 bin… 10 bins with me, like 1, 2, 3, till 10, or 0 up to 9. So this is nothing but data discretization.
Where we are dividing the data, in such a way that certain set of data falls in some bin, and we call it some… and assign it some discrete value, and we call this data discretization.
Then there's something called concept hierarchy.
So, what is a concept hierarchy? In case of a concept hierarchy, we are having some implicit hierarchy in the data. For example, if we talk about location.
So, location is an attribute. Now, the location could be our country, it could be our state, it could be our city, it could be our street, and so on and so forth. So, there's an inherent hierarchy involved in the attribute-like location, and we can use this
hierarchy to represent this particular value called location. Suppose I want a very fine-grained representation. I can go up to the street level.
If I have a more coarser or a broader representation, I can go up to city, or up to state, up to country, and so on and so forth. So, we can have different levels in the hierarchy, and we can utilize those values from corresponding level in the hierarchy that we want.
If we want lots of values, we go to the street level. If we got, somewhat less number of values, we go to city level, still lesser state, still lesser country, like that.
So, this is how we utilize the concept hierarchy.
So… Okay.
Just a second… So I think there's some question that I could see here on… Oh… Okay.
So I think I could see a question that, about parametric reduction.
Okay, so Srinam, parametric reduction means That we are using model.
We are using a model to represent the data. Obviously, when we build a model, we will need to represent the model with the help of some parameters. So that is parametric representation of the data.
Okay? Say, model will need some… for example, if I have a model like Y is equal to MX plus C,
Suppose I have a model of this kind.
where this is a linear model. So then, the parameters that I'll need to estimate are the slope M and the constant C. So, no matter what we use to, designate
You know, a given set of points, what we will use
are some parameters. So this is the parametric method of data representation. Is it okay?
Shriram P
Shriram P
01:47:55
Yes, ma'am, got it. Thank you.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:47:57
Yeah, any other questions, anyone?
So,
If there are any questions, then I'll proceed further on one or two topics before we wrap up for today.
Oh.
Okay, I can see… Oh… Okay.
Oh, Lord.
Alright, let go.
So, the next topic will be on similarity and dissimilarity, and since it's a very different topic, I'd like to take it in a new class. However, I'll just introduce what we mean by similarity or dissimilarity.
So, the amount of, alikeness
Across points is said to be the similarity in the points.
Those points which are very similar, or are said to be very alike, or those points which are like each other are said to be similar.
And usually, similarity would be represented in a range, say, 0 to 1, where 0 means no similarity, and 1 means maximum similarity, where the one data element is equal to the other.
The converse of similarity is dissimilarity, where we try to measure how different the data elements are with respect to each other.
So, if we have a high amount of dissimilarity, then this means that the data elements being discussed are very different. If we have a low amount of dissimilarity, means they are similar to each other.
So, minimum value of dissimilarity could be 0. When dissimilarity is 0, means the data elements are exactly equal, or they are exactly alike each other. And if we have a dissimilarity value equal to 1, means that the data elements are very different, almost reverse of each other.
So, this is what similarity and dissimilarity mean.
Sometimes, we also represent similarity by proximity.
So, proximity is a generic term that could be used to represent similarity or dissimilarity.
So, when we say proximity of a point, we actually mean the distance or the closeness of a point with respect to some other point.
So, we could represent the similarity using proximity.
like that.
So, so then we'll… in the next turn, we'll be talking about different measures, about similarity, and how to find out the similarity between points, or how to find out the dissimilarity between points.
So, as of now, I'll just,
Stop here and invite any questions, if there are.
laxmi sahu
laxmi sahu
01:51:03
Ma'am, can we say that similarity, dissimilarity are same as the relation and correlation, which we do in heat map?
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:51:12
Correlation often means co-occurrence.
Or correlation can mean, some kind of relationship
Between the two, similarity may not be correlation always. Similarity means the…
the closeness between the two points. For example, I can say that, this cloth material is similar to the other one. So they… the two are alike each other.
Right, but if I say co-occurrence, or if I talk about correlation, then I can say that, material A may be correlated
with material B. For example, material A, shirt, may be correlated with material B, trouser.
So that is correlation.
laxmi sahu
laxmi sahu
01:52:04
Good.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:52:07
Any other questions, anyone?
Okay, I think there's a question on whether we'll be having any hands-on, covered for whatever we have covered today. Yes, you'll have hands-on on whatever I teach, not just today, always throughout the course.
Whatever I teach, the theory will be followed by a hands-on session. So, we will be having hands-on either starting next week or next to next week.
So, either I'll cover some more theory next week, and then start with the hands-on, or whatever, I'll, have it announced on the LMS.
So far, we have used Colab. I think it will be… a link for CoLab will be available on your LMS, and I'll also ask the Futurance team to provide one if it is not already provided. So, you can use Colab separately also.
Or whatever way you want to do the coding. But for us, we'll be using Colab so that it's a single environment, used by everyone, and you can
run and see the results, similar to what we are doing here. So, we will definitely have hands-on.
Okay.
So, any other questions? Anyone?
Definitely, I'll suggest those who are familiar and those who are new, all of you to, just have a recap on whatever I've taught.
If you will, keep reading whatever I've taught.
It will be good because you'll remember, and everything will… is actually sequenced out in the sense that what you're learning today will be used tomorrow, and so on and so forth. So right now, I'm talking about data preprocessing. It will be used throughout the, course.
Because whenever we have data, it will require preprocessing. So you need to know these concepts. If you are knowing already, it's good. If you are not knowing, and if you are new to the field.
Then you should, actually go through the material that is provided by Futurance or by me, the study material. You can also consult the net and find out some free study material for any particular topic.
And familiarize yourself with the topic.
Anyone, anything else?
Yeah, so I think there is some question about the detailed syllabus that, so I had shown you the syllabus. You will be provided with that same, syllabus.
what I had shown you. Only thing is that, it is just, under preparation. That is, I had shown you the topics, but, we are just associating the weeks and all, so you should, hopefully by the…
Next week, you'll get the entire schedule. So, don't worry, we will not give you a partial one. We'll give you the entire set of topics, week by week, how they'll be followed.
Okay?
Okay, Adity, you have a question?
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:55:22
Yes, ma'am. It's not a question, it's a concern. It's not regarding this class. It's for the batch manager. I've sent a couple of emails more than a week ago, and I've got no reply on that. Batch Manager, can you please look into it?
I've sent you a DM also in the chat, but I don't know if you've read it, I've not gotten any replied as of now.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:55:43
So, I think the Futurance co-host, if you can please take a note of the concern of Aditya.
I hope, Atul, you are there.
So actually, oh…
So, usually, we have Simran, who takes care of the sessions, so today she's not here.
And we were supposed to have Atul in her place. I'm sure Atul must be there. Atul, can you please, respond?
I'm sorry, I'm not sure about, what I thought was a…
Atul would be there. Anyhow,
Gen AI Batch 2 Manager, could you please respond?
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:56:47
Yeah, I've tried pinging him or her in the chat, but I've not gotten any response.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:56:52
So, yeah, so actually, today, Simran is away. Probably you can write to Simran.
About the concerns, on the email ID provided.
And I'll also, so I'll request, oh…
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:57:10
Yeah, we have only one email ID, ma'am, as far as I know, and they're very unresponsive on that email.
Sathish Prabu Chelliah Krishnasamy
Sathish Prabu Chelliah Krishnasamy
01:57:19
Actually, actually, give me one more email ID for the, for the Simran one, but the Simran email ID does not join at us. I'm, I'm always getting mail, and the delivery only.
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:57:33
Okay.
Gautam Sharma
Gautam Sharma
01:57:34
I think it's the same with me as well, Avikya, so…
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:57:36
So, I'll just, take a note of,
this thing, and I'll try. I hope the co-host here is also…
hearing, so I'll request Simran to… Respond on the concern.
That you have raised about the management.
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:58:02
Yeah, if you can put in a word, ma'am, I think that would be a great help for us.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:58:07
Yeah, I'm doing it right away, I'm just texting Simran.
She's away today, otherwise she would be here.
Oh… Okay, so I'm just doing that. I've done it already.
Thanks.
Aditya Banda
Aditya Banda
01:58:22
Thanks, man.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:58:22
Yeah.
So… Anything else before we wrap up for today?
Any other concerns, questions?
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:58:36
Ma'am, again, there's a question regarding attenders on LMS, or there is an attendance section, so again, this question will be for Simran, once she joins next time.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:58:45
Yeah, so you can, have, take a note, and then next time she'll be there.
rashmi tribhuwan
rashmi tribhuwan
01:58:51
So you can just, please find out from her, so she'll be the best person to answer.
Sure. Thank you much.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:59:01
Jitu, do you have a question?
JT
Jithu Tagore
01:59:04
Yeah, ma'am. From, dimensionality reduction, you have explained one feature selection and feature discussion, right? Yes. Can you explain a brief that which feature selection part.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
01:59:17
Yes, sure.
So, let's say we have a data in which there are some 15 attributes given to us.
But sometimes it may happen that not all 15 may be useful for our analysis purpose. And we may want to retain, say, out of 15, some… 10 of them, or 9 of them.
So, that is what is feature selection about, that we try to choose the relevant features, and retain those, and
The rest of them we ignore for our further analysis. So, we are actually selecting a subset of the features from the given full set. This is what is feature selection. And then there are different ways to perform feature selection. For example, forming a decision tree is one of them.
Is it okay, Cheetu?
JT
Jithu Tagore
02:00:08
Yeah, it's soccer ball.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
02:00:13
Okay, if there are no further questions or comments, then we can break for today. I will be passing the slides to
Simran, and hopefully she'll upload on the LMS. She's away today, so I'm not sure, but I've also shared yesterday's slides with her, so hopefully you'll get it today, but
If she's away, probably by tomorrow, so maybe I'll request you to bear for this time. However, she's quite prompt, and immediately we upload the materials. I mean, I just pass it on to her, and she uploads on the items.
I'll also try to share in future classes a set of some
questions, maybe some, few multiple-choice questions, which are not graded, but those are exercise questions. If you wish, you can just attempt them and see what you have learned.
Okay?
So, with that, I'll just wrap up today's class. Thank you all, have a great Sunday. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Abhishek Dagar
Abhishek Dagar
02:01:17
Thanks, man, bye.
Nirav Mehta
Nirav Mehta
02:01:18
Thanks, bud.
JT
Jithu Tagore
02:01:18
Thank you.
Krishna Kumar MS
Krishna Kumar MS
02:01:23
Thanks, man, bye.
Durga Toshniwal
Durga Toshniwal
Thank you, bye-bye.